[BLOG] Variant Type in Apache Parquet for Semi-Structured Data (#171)
apache/parquet-site: content/en/blog/features/variant.md

---

> title: "The Evolution of Semi-Structured Data: Introducing Variant in Apache Parquet"

Reviewer: The title looked a little wordy when I rendered it locally. What do you think about making it slightly shorter, something like this perhaps?

```suggestion
title: "Introducing Variant in Apache Parquet for Semi-Structured Data"
```

<img width="838" height="268" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/120426fa-b70a-4642-a2ee-068d4a001075" />

date: 2026-02-14
description: "Native Variant Type in Apache Parquet"
author: "[Aihua Xu](https://github.com/aihuaxu), [Andrew Lamb](https://github.com/alamb)"
categories: ["features"]
---

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: I suggest removing this initial heading as it seems to render strangely on the document

```suggestion
```

<img width="1156" height="681" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5ae68c3e-01c6-4eaa-be92-aa1137eb838d" />

While Apache Parquet has long been the standard for structured data where each value has a fixed and known type, handling heterogeneous, nested data often required a compromise: either store it as a costly-to-parse JSON string or flatten it into a rigid schema. The introduction of the Variant logical type provides a native, high-performance solution for semi-structured data that is already seeing rapid uptake across the ecosystem.

---

## What is Variant?

**Variant** is a self-describing data type designed to efficiently store and process semi-structured data—JSON-like documents with arbitrary and evolving schemas.

---

## Why Variant?

Unlike traditional approaches that store JSON as text strings and require full parsing to access any field, making queries slow and resource-intensive, Variant solves this by storing data in a **structured binary format** that enables direct field access through offset-based navigation. Query engines can jump directly to nested fields without deserializing the entire document, dramatically improving performance.

> Unlike similar binary encodings such as BSON, Variant is optimized for the common case where multiple values share a similar structure: It avoids redundantly storing repeated field names and standardizes the best practice of **"shredded storage"** for pre-extracting structured subsets.

Reviewer: minor grammar nit:

```suggestion
Unlike similar binary encodings such as BSON, Variant is optimized for the common case where multiple values share a similar structure: it avoids redundantly storing repeated field names and standardizes the best practice of **"shredded storage"** for pre-extracting structured subsets.
```

### Key Benefits

- **Type-Preserving Storage:** Original data types are maintained in their native formats—data types (integers, strings, booleans, timestamps, etc.) are preserved, unlike JSON which has a limited type system with no native support for types like timestamps or integers.

- **Efficient Encoding:** The binary format uses field name deduplication to minimize storage overhead compared to JSON strings or BSON encoding.

> - **Fast Query Performance:** Direct offset-based field access provides performance improvement over JSON string parsing. Optional shredding of frequently accessed fields into typed columns further enhances query pruning and predicate pushdown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Fast Query Performance:** Direct offset-based field access provides performance improvements over JSON string parsing. Optional shredding of frequently accessed fields into typed columns further enhances query pruning and predicate pushdown.
```

Compared with storing the same payload as a JSON string, Variant retains type information (for example, timestamp values are stored as integers rather than being stored as strings), which improves correctness, enables more efficient querying and requires fewer bytes to store.

Just as importantly, Variant supports **schema variability**: records with different shapes can coexist in the same column without requiring schema migrations. For example, the following record can be stored alongside the event record above:

```json
{
  "userId": 12345,
  "error": "auth_failure" 
}
```

---

## Shredding Encoding

To enhance query performance and storage efficiency, Variant data can be **shredded** by extracting frequently accessed fields into separate, strongly-typed columns, as described in the [detailed shredding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md). For each shredded field:

- If the field **matches the expected schema**, its value is written to the strongly typed field.
- If the field **does not match**, the original representation is written as Variant-encoded binary field and the corresponding strongly typed field is left NULL.

> ![Shredding Variant Visualization](/blog/variant/variant_shredding.png)

Reviewer: A minor nitpit here is that there seems to be quite a lot of whitespace at the bottom of this image

<img width="1067" height="706" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4f0c8f65-6197-420f-a47f-2d138b6ce803" />

Author: I trimmed the space below. Please take another look.

Reviewer: Looks much better

- **Metadata Control:** To control metadata overhead, engines may limit the number of shredded fields, since each field contributes statistics (min/max values, null counts) to the file footer and column stats.

- **Explicit Shredding Schema:** When read patterns are known in advance, engines can specify an explicit shredding schema at write time, ensuring that frequently accessed fields are shredded for optimal query performance.

### Performance Characteristics

- **Selective field access:** When queries access only the shredded fields, only those columns are read from Parquet, skipping the rest, benefiting from column pruning and predicate pushdown.

- **Full Variant reconstruction:** When queries require access to the complete Variant object, there is a performance overhead as the engine must reconstruct the Variant by merging data from the shredded typed fields and the base Variant column.

### Examples of Shredded Parquet Schemas

> The following example shows shredding non nested Variants. In this case, the writer chose to shred String values as the `typed_value` column.  Rows which do not contain strings are stored in the `value` column, with the binary variant encoding.

Reviewer: Here is a suggestion to make this wording more consistent with the rest of the post: 

```suggestion
The following example shows shredding non-nested Variant values. In this case, the writer chose to shred string values as the `typed_value` column. Rows that do not contain strings are stored in the `value` column with binary Variant encoding.
```

```parquet
optional group SIMPLE_DATA (VARIANT(1)) = 1 { 
    required binary metadata;           # variant metadata
    optional binary value;              # non-shredded value  	
    optional binary typed_value (STRING); # the shredded value 
}
```

The series of variant values “Jim”, 100,  {“name”: “Jim”} are encoded as:

| Variant Value | `value` | `typed_value` |
|---------------|---------|---------------|
| `"Jim"` | `null` | `"Jim"` |
| `100` | `100` | `null` |
| `{"name": "Jim"}` | `{"name": "Jim"}` | `null` |

---

> Shredding nested variants is similar, with the shredding applied recursively, as shown in the following example. In this case, the `userId` field is shredded as an integer, and stored as two columns: in `typed_value.userId.typed_value` when the value is integer and as a variant in `typed_value.userId.value` otherwise. Similarly, the `eType` field is shredded as a string and stored in `typed_value.eType.typed_value` and `typed_value.eType.value`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shredding nested Variant values is similar, with shredding applied recursively, as shown in the following example. In this case, the `userId` field is shredded as an integer and stored in two columns: `typed_value.userId.typed_value` when the value is an integer, and `typed_value.userId.value` otherwise. Similarly, the `eType` field is shredded as a string and stored in `typed_value.eType.typed_value` and `typed_value.eType.value`.

```

```parquet
optional group EVENT_DATA (VARIANT(1)) = 1 {
    required binary metadata;           # variant metadata
    optional binary value;              # non-shredded value 	
    optional group typed_value {
      required group userId {          # userId field
        optional binary value;          # non-shredded value
        optional int32 typed_value;     # the shredded value
      }
      required group eType {             # eType field
        optional binary value;          # non-shredded value
        optional binary typed_value (STRING); # the shredded value
      }
    }
}
```

**The table below illustrates how the data is stored:**

| Variant                             | `value`          | `typed_value.userId.value` | `typed_value.userId.typed_value` | `typed_value.eType.value` | `typed_value.eType.typed_value` |
|-------------------------------------|------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------|
| `{"userId": 100, "eType": "login"}` | `null`           | `null`                     | `100`                            | `null`                    | `"login"`           |

> | `100`                               | `100`            |                            |                                  |                           |         |           |

Reviewer: Should the values in the `typed_value.userId.value` etc columns be null for this row too to match the other rows?

| `{"userId": "Jim"}`                 | `null`           | `"Jim"`                    | `null`                           | `null`                    | `null`              |
| `{"userId": 200, "amount": 99}`     | `{"amount": 99}` | `null`                     | `200`                            | `null`                    | `null`              |

---

## Ecosystem Adoption: A Success Story

One of the most remarkable aspects of Variant's addition to Parquet is the rapid and widespread ecosystem adoption, demonstrating the strength of collaboration within the Apache Parquet community.

> Variant support has been implemented across multiple Parquet libraries including **Java**, **Arrow C++**, **Rust**, and **Go**. For the most current implementation status across all languages and platforms, refer to the [official Parquet documentation](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format).

Reviewer: It might make sense to refer to the implementation status page here instead https://parquet.apache.org/docs/file-format/implementationstatus/

```suggestion
Variant support has been implemented across multiple Parquet libraries including **Java**, **Arrow C++**, **Rust**, and **Go**. For the most current implementation status across all languages and platforms, refer to the [official Parquet implementation status page](https://parquet.apache.org/docs/file-format/implementationstatus/).
```

author: "[Aihua Xu](https://github.com/aihuaxu), [Andrew Lamb](https://github.com/alamb)"
categories: ["features"]
---

## Introduction

The Apache Parquet community is excited to announce the addition of the **Variant type**—a feature that brings native support for semi-structured data to Parquet, significantly improving efficiency compared to less efficient formats such as JSON. This marks a significant addition to Parquet, demonstrating how the format continues to evolve to meet modern data engineering needs.

While Apache Parquet has long been the standard for structured data where each value has a fixed and known type, handling heterogeneous, nested data often required a compromise: either store it as a costly-to-parse JSON string or flatten it into a rigid schema. The introduction of the Variant logical type provides a native, high-performance solution for semi-structured data that is already seeing rapid uptake across the ecosystem.

---

## What is Variant?

**Variant** is a self-describing data type designed to efficiently store and process semi-structured data—JSON-like documents with arbitrary and evolving schemas.

---

## Why Variant?

> Unlike traditional approaches that store JSON as text strings and require full parsing to access any field, making queries slow and resource-intensive, Variant solves this by storing data in a **structured binary format** that enables direct field access through offset-based navigation. Query engines can jump directly to nested fields without deserializing the entire document, dramatically improving performance.

Reviewer 2: It might be better to motivate why variant with an example here. event_data is mentioned below, so maybe we can talk about storing logged Event data, that has a structure that might evolve because new events are added, or fields are added or removed from a specific event type.  

Then motivate this with a query.  e.g. `Select event[timestamps] where event[User] = 5`.  Then you can explain that if the events where just stored as JSON (there original format) we require partings the JSON to do any processing.  BSON could be an improvement but is still potentially sub-optimal because you end up repeated storage of common keys.

Author: I updated  a little bit. Please take a look.

---

## Overview of Variant Type in Parquet

Parquet introduced the [Variant logical type](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/LogicalTypes.md#variant) in [August 2025](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/pull/509).

### Variant Encoding

In Parquet, Variant is represented as a logical type and stored physically as a struct with two binary fields. The encoding is [designed](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md) so engines can efficiently navigate nested structures and extract only the fields they need, rather than parsing the entire binary blob.

```parquet
optional group event_data (VARIANT(1)) {
  required binary metadata;
  required binary value;
}
```

- **`metadata`:** Encodes type information and shared dictionaries (for example, field-name dictionaries for objects). This avoids repeatedly storing the same strings and enables efficient navigation.
- **`value`:** Encodes the actual data in a compact binary form, supporting primitive values as well as arrays and objects.

> #### Example

Reviewer 2: As noted above, we should probably move this example up, and call out the loss of type information as JSON as another down-side.

Reviewer: @aihuaxu reworked the intro to incorporate this feedback

|-------------------------------------|------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------|
| `{"userId": 100, "eType": "login"}` | `null`           | `null`                     | `100`                            | `null`                    | `"login"`           |
| `100`                               | `100`            | `null`                     | `null`                          |   `null`                   |  `null`       |
| `{"userId": "Jim"}`                 | `null`           | `"Jim"`                    | `null`                           | `null`                    | `null`              |
| `{"userId": 200, "amount": 99}`     | `{"amount": 99}` | `null`                     | `200`                            | `null`                    | `null`              |

---

## Ecosystem Adoption: A Success Story

One of the most remarkable aspects of Variant's addition to Parquet is the rapid and widespread ecosystem adoption, demonstrating the strength of collaboration within the Apache Parquet community.

> Variant support has been implemented across multiple Parquet libraries including **Java**, **Arrow C++**, **Rust**, and **Go**. For the most current implementation status across all languages and platforms, refer to the [official Parquet implementation status page](https://parquet.apache.org/docs/file-format/implementationstatus/).

Reviewer 2: Did Arrow C++ land?  The implementation status page (https://parquet.apache.org/docs/file-format/implementationstatus/) still shows it as not implemented.

Reviewer 3: Arrow C++ does not fully implement it yet. It can just read unshredded variant column via the variant extension type.

Author: That's right. It's not fully implemented although the type is supported. I removed it now.

---
title: "The Evolution of Semi-Structured Data: Introducing Variant in Apache Parquet"
date: 2026-02-14
description: "Native Variant Type in Apache Parquet"

> author: "[Aihua Xu](https://github.com/aihuaxu), [Andrew Lamb](https://github.com/alamb)"

Author: @alamb  Can you help review? I added you as co-author here since you contributed a lot. Let me know it's OK.

Reviewer: Thank you -- that is very nice of you. I appreciate it

Just as importantly, Variant supports **schema variability**: records with different shapes can coexist in the same column without requiring schema migrations. For example, the following record can be stored alongside the event record above:

```json
{
  "userId": 12345,
  "error": "auth_failure" 
}
```

---

## Shredding Encoding

To enhance query performance and storage efficiency, Variant data can be **shredded** by extracting frequently accessed fields into separate, strongly-typed columns, as described in the [detailed shredding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md). For each shredded field:

- If the field **matches the expected schema**, its value is written to the strongly typed field.
- If the field **does not match**, the original representation is written as Variant-encoded binary field and the corresponding strongly typed field is left NULL.

![Shredding Variant Visualization](/blog/variant/variant_shredding.png)

> The query engine decides which fields to shred based on access patterns and workload characteristics. Once shredded, the standard Parquet columnar optimizations (encoding, compression, statistics) are used for the typed columns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The parquet writer, typically a query engine, decides which fields to shred based on access patterns and workload characteristics. Once shredded, the standard Parquet columnar optimizations (encoding, compression, statistics) are used for the typed columns.
```

- **Explicit Shredding Schema:** When read patterns are known in advance, engines can specify an explicit shredding schema at write time, ensuring that frequently accessed fields are shredded for optimal query performance.

### Performance Characteristics

- **Selective field access:** When queries access only the shredded fields, only those columns are read from Parquet, skipping the rest, benefiting from column pruning and predicate pushdown.

- **Full Variant reconstruction:** When queries require access to the complete Variant object, there is a performance overhead as the engine must reconstruct the Variant by merging data from the shredded typed fields and the base Variant column.

### Examples of Shredded Parquet Schemas

The following example shows shredding non-nested Variant values. In this case, the writer chose to shred string values as the `typed_value` column. Rows that do not contain strings are stored in the `value` column with binary Variant encoding.

```parquet

> optional group SIMPLE_DATA (VARIANT(1)) = 1 { 

Reviewer 3: As we are using `VARIANT(1)` here, should we also update the spec to be consistent? https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/LogicalTypes.md#variant

Reviewer: That is a good point -- I double checked at the (1) is the "Variant Version":

https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/38818fa0e7efd54b535001a4448030a40619c2a3/src/main/thrift/parquet.thrift#L409-L413

```thrift
/**
 * Embedded Variant logical type annotation
 */
struct VariantType {
  // The version of the variant specification that the variant was
  // written with.
  1: optional i8 specification_version
}
```

I made a PR to update
- https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/pull/555

| `100` | `100` | `null` |
| `{"name": "Jim"}` | `{"name": "Jim"}` | `null` |

---

Shredding nested Variant values is similar, with shredding applied recursively, as shown in the following example. In this case, the `userId` field is shredded as an integer and stored in two columns: `typed_value.userId.typed_value` when the value is an integer, and `typed_value.userId.value` otherwise. Similarly, the `eType` field is shredded as a string and stored in `typed_value.eType.typed_value` and `typed_value.eType.value`.

```parquet
optional group EVENT_DATA (VARIANT(1)) = 1 {
    required binary metadata;           # variant metadata
    optional binary value;              # non-shredded value 	
    optional group typed_value {
      required group userId {          # userId field
        optional binary value;          # non-shredded value
        optional int32 typed_value;     # the shredded value
      }
      required group eType {             # eType field
        optional binary value;          # non-shredded value
        optional binary typed_value (STRING); # the shredded value
      }
    }
}
```

**The table below illustrates how the data is stored:**

> | Variant                             | `value`          | `typed_value.userId.value` | `typed_value.userId.typed_value` | `typed_value.eType.value` | `typed_value.eType.typed_value` |

Reviewer: This table looks left heavy

<img width="1515" height="485" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f2700876-f0e9-47f4-8644-99853442d4ca" />

@aihuaxu  is it ok if I try to update the formatting to make it look better (aka basically apply https://github.com/aihuaxu/parquet-site/pull/1 ?) I can push to your branch but wanted to ask you first before I did so

Author: @alamb  Please go ahead.

Reviewer: done in ffba676d12d0021d3b9493829a72706cfcb1641b

Reviewer: <img width="1138" height="421" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-24 at 7 29 59 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/96df0d5d-30c6-423d-966d-0626587912ab" />

(I also changed the first column's heading from Variant --> Variant Value to be consistent with the previous table)

---

## Real-World Use Cases

### Event Stream Analytics

Event streaming applications often handle events with evolving schemas, where different event types contain varying fields. Variant provides a flexible solution for storing heterogeneous event data without requiring schema migrations.

**Example: User Activity Events**

```sql
-- Create table with Variant column
CREATE TABLE event_stream (
    event_id INTEGER,
    event_data VARIANT
);

-- Insert events with different schemas
INSERT INTO event_stream VALUES
    (1, PARSE_JSON('{"user": {"id": 100, "country": "US"}, "actions": ["login", "view_dashboard"]}')),
    (2, PARSE_JSON('{"user": {"id": 101, "country": "UK", "premium": true}, "actions": ["login", "upgrade"]}')),
    (3, PARSE_JSON('{"user": {"id": 102, "country": "CA"}, "session_duration": 3600}'));

-- Query events with path notation - handles different schemas gracefully
SELECT 
    event_id,

>     event_data:user.id::INTEGER as user_id,

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we could just leave out the Real world use-cases or maybe consolidate with the example above (and just given the example schema.  For instance we already talk about events).

Reviewer: I agree it is strictly somewhat redundant. However, as these examples are at the end of the post, and shows how users interact with Variant (via Spark SQL ) I think it is worth including to help readers draw the direct connection of how they could use Variant

Reviewer 2: OK, if this is specific spark SQL content maybe we should call this out in an intro paragraph below "Real-World Use Cases".

Reviewer: Added a intro in 972895b03f1bd8b7deee90f6297ae8a15122016d

Reviewer 2: Nice, thanks, reads much better!

);

-- Insert events with different schemas
INSERT INTO event_stream VALUES
    (1, PARSE_JSON('{"user": {"id": 100, "country": "US"}, "actions": ["login", "view_dashboard"]}')),
    (2, PARSE_JSON('{"user": {"id": 101, "country": "UK", "premium": true}, "actions": ["login", "upgrade"]}')),
    (3, PARSE_JSON('{"user": {"id": 102, "country": "CA"}, "session_duration": 3600}'));

-- Query events with path notation - handles different schemas gracefully
SELECT 
    event_id,
    event_data:user.id::INTEGER as user_id,
    event_data:user.country::STRING as country,
    event_data:user.premium::BOOLEAN as is_premium
FROM event_stream;
```

---

### IoT Sensor Data

IoT deployments often involve diverse sensor types, each producing data with unique structures. Traditional approaches require either separate tables per sensor type or complex union schemas, or inefficient JSON / BSON encoding. Variant enables unified storage while maintaining type safety.

**Example: Multi-Sensor Data Pipeline**

```sql
-- Create unified sensor table
CREATE TABLE sensor_readings (
    reading_id INTEGER,
    timestamp TIMESTAMP,
    sensor_data VARIANT
);

-- Insert data from different sensor types

> INSERT INTO sensor_readings VALUES

Reviewer: I also had to update this example when I tested using spark-sql:

```sql
spark-sql (default)> INSERT INTO sensor_readings VALUES
                   > (1, '2026-01-28 10:00:00',
                   >      PARSE_JSON('{"sensor_id": "T001", "temp": 72.5, "unit": "F", "battery": 95}')),
                   >     (2, '2026-01-28 10:00:05',
                   >      PARSE_JSON('{"sensor_id": "M001", "motion_detected": true, "confidence": 0.95, "zone": "entrance"}')),
                   >     (3, '2026-01-28 10:00:10',
                   >      PARSE_JSON('{"sensor_id": "C001", "image_url": "s3://bucket/img_001.jpg", "objects_detected": ["person", "vehicle"]}'));
[INCOMPATIBLE_DATA_FOR_TABLE.CANNOT_SAFELY_CAST] Cannot write incompatible data for the table `spark_catalog`.`default`.`sensor_readings`: Cannot safely cast `timestamp` "STRING" to "TIMESTAMP". SQLSTATE: KD000
```

So I added an explicit `::timestamp` cast in 43fc1116

```sql
spark-sql (default)> INSERT INTO sensor_readings VALUES
                   >     (1, '2026-01-28 10:00:00'::timestamp,
                   >      PARSE_JSON('{"sensor_id": "T001", "temp": 72.5, "unit": "F", "battery": 95}')),
                   >     (2, '2026-01-28 10:00:05'::timestamp,
                   >      PARSE_JSON('{"sensor_id": "M001", "motion_detected": true, "confidence": 0.95, "zone": "entrance"}')),
                   >     (3, '2026-01-28 10:00:10'::timestamp,
                   >      PARSE_JSON('{"sensor_id": "C001", "image_url": "s3://bucket/img_001.jpg", "objects_detected": ["person", "vehicle"]}'));
Time taken: 1.067 seconds
```
